Add documentation for the CI + CD workflow (#1001)
WordPress/openverse: documentation/reference/ci_cd.md

# CI + CD workflow

The CI + CD workflow is the primary pipeline of the project. It runs the tests

> for all layers of the stack and deploys the API and frontend to their respective

Reviewer: Maybe?
```suggestion
for all layers of the stack (as necessary for a given PR) and deploys the API and frontend to their respective
```

Author: Updated in 6ae49fe.

staging ECS targets if the tests pass.

It's a complex workflow with many jobs that depend on each other and the number
of paths it can take becomes huge because jobs can be skipped based on the
contents of a PR or commit.

## Output

> The CI + CD workflow has four main outputs when new commits are pushed to the
> `main` branch, not each outcome is expected on each commit. The first of these,
> "documentation" is also applicable to PRs.

Reviewer: Slight wording suggestion:
```suggestion
The CI + CD workflow has four main outputs when new commits are pushed to the
`main` branch, although not all outputs are expected on each commit. The first of these,
"documentation" is also applicable to PRs.
```

Author: Updated in 6ae49fe.

- **Documentation:** For each PR that affects the documentation, the
  documentation is built and deployed to a preview site. When a new commit is

>   pushed to `main` that affects the documentation, the documentation is built

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  pushed to `main` which affects the documentation, the documentation is built
```

Author: Updated in 6ae49fe.

([`github.sha`](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/contexts#github-context))
of the last commit.

**Outputs:**

```typescript
{
  image_tag: string // the tag to use for the Docker images
}
```

### `determine-images`

Determines which images to build and publish as a part of the workflow run. To
speed up the workflow and avoid wasteful resource consumption, only a subset of
all images are built by the workflow and a only subset of those images are
published to GHCR. This job determines those images.

| Change             | `upstream_db` | `catalog` | `ingestion_server` | `api` | `api_nginx` | `frontend` |
| ------------------ | ------------- | --------- | ------------------ | ----- | ----------- | ---------- |
| `catalog`          | 🛠️            | 🚀        |                    |       |             |            |
| `ingestion_server` | 🛠             |           | 🚀                 | 🛠     |             |            |
| `api`              | 🛠             |           | 🛠                  | 🚀    | 🚀          |            |
| `frontend`         |               |           |                    |       |             | 🚀         |

> 🚀 implies that the image is published to GHCR. 🛠️ implies that the image is

Reviewer: This is excellent! I am noticing though that there are different characters used for the first hammer/wrench emoji and all the others 😮

Author: Sorry I do not understand, they are all 🛠 ("hammer and wrench").

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/24264157/232655259-4a27fd99-0307-4191-94cf-3da1e81f230e.png)

I bet macOS isn't making a distinction between the two, but they are different:

```
>>> '🛠'.encode()
b'\xf0\x9f\x9b\xa0\xef\xb8\x8f'
>>> '🛠'.encode()
b'\xf0\x9f\x9b\xa0'
```

The first is the colourful version, the second is the plain black version. No idea what would have caused the difference though.

Author: Can you make them identical, I tried copying and pasting but Git shows no changes.

Reviewer 2: I was able to do so in VSCode: https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/pull/1806

Author: Please feel free to merge the PR or push the commit to this branch directly!

          context: "ingestion_server"
          target: "ing"
        }
      | { image: "api"; context: "api"; target: "api" }
      | { image: "api_nginx"; context: "api"; target: "nginx" }
    )[] // additional information about images to be built
  }
  do_publish: "true" | "false" // whether one or more images are to be published
  publish_matrix: {
    image: ("catalog" | "ingestion_server" | "api" | "api_nginx" | "frontend")[] // the name of the image to be published
  }
}
```

## Universal jobs

### `build-images`

Builds images as dictated by the [`determine-images`](#determine-images) job.
Since the images are built in a matrix, some image-specific steps are
conditionally run using an `if` expression. Since any unused Docker build
arguments have no effect, the job simply populates all build arguments needed by
all images.

Images built by this job are published as `.tar` artifacts and can be loaded
into other jobs that need them using the [`load-img`](#load-img) action.

This job is only run if there is at least one image needed to build, based on
the `do_build` output of the [`determine-images`](#determine-images) job.

## Catalog jobs

> ### `test-cat`

Reviewer: 😼

Author: Haha, very fortunate how the three character name for the catalog turned out. Fits right in with `ing`, `api` and `app`!

nor Node.js needs to be installed.

This job is skipped if the API codebase has not changed. Its counterparts are
[`test-cat`](#test-cat) for the catalog, [`test-ing`](#test-ing) for the
ingestion server and [`nuxt-build`](#nuxt-build) for the frontend.

```{note}
This job is treated as the proof of functionality for publishing Docker images
for the API. Since it also initialises the API, it also largely proves that the
ingestion server is working.
```

### `django-checks`

Runs a matrix of various Django checks for the API using the following `just`
recipes.

- `api/dj check`
- `api/dj validateopenapischema`
- `api/dj makemigrations --check --noinput --merge`
- `api/doc-test`

This job is skipped if the API codebase has not changed. Its counterpart is
[`nuxt-checks`](#nuxt-checks) for the frontend.

#### `bypass-django-checks`

The `django-checks` job is marked as required check in GitHub. If the job is
skipped, the matrix will not be expanded into individual jobs and all required
checks will appear as pending, thus blocking PRs from being merged.

To counter this, the `bypass-django-checks` job is run if the API codebase has

> not changed, and it simply passes the checks by having the same job names.

Reviewer: This blurb is shared by all of the `bypass-*` jobs and is very similar, does Sphinx provide any mechanism for us having a repeated section with slightly different references? Or perhaps, could we define the bypass info once and then reference that section in each of these places? Just so we don't need to update several places if this description were to be changed!

Author: I copy pasted that in three places because I assumed no one would read the entire file and the reader would most probably use the right sidebar to jump to the relevant section directly. That's also why this page has so many internal links between different jobs and actions.

Reviewer 2: Could there be a "bypass jobs" section and each of the jobs that have it link to it? Something like:

```md
### Bypass jobs

Some jobs are marked as required check in GitHub. If the job is
skipped, the matrix will not be expanded into individual jobs and all required
checks will appear as pending, thus blocking PRs from being merged.

To counter this, those jobs have "bypass" jobs named in the pattern "bypass-{job name}".
```

````md
### `playwright`

Runs a matrix of various Playwright tests for the frontend using the following
Node.js scripts.

- `test:playwright visual-regression`
- `test:playwright e2e`
- `test:storybook`

This job is skipped if the frontend codebase has not changed.

```{note}
This job, combined with the [`nuxt-build` job](#nuxt-build), is treated as the
proof of functionality for deploying frontend to staging.
```

```{note}
[This job has an accompanying bypass job](#bypass-jobs).
```
````

Still some duplication in needing to paste the note everywhere, but at least the full text is deduplicated.

Reviewer 2: The description of the bypass jobs needs more updating to make it more general, but hopefully the idea makes sense :sweat_smile:

Author: This makes sense, de-duplicated the text in c52f0bb.

checks will appear as pending, thus blocking PRs from being merged.

To counter this, the `bypass-nuxt-checks` job is run if the frontend codebase
has not changed, and it simply passes the checks by having the same job names.

### `playwright`

Runs a matrix of various Playwright tests for the frontend using the following
Node.js scripts.

- `test:playwright visual-regression`
- `test:playwright e2e`
- `test:storybook`

This job is skipped if the frontend codebase has not changed.

```{note}
This job, combined with the [`nuxt-build` job](#nuxt-build), is treated as the
proof of functionality for deploying frontend to staging.
```

#### `bypass-playwright`

The `playwright` job is marked as required check in GitHub. If the job is
skipped, the matrix will not be expanded into individual jobs and all required
checks will appear as pending, thus blocking PRs from being merged.

To counter this, the `bypass-playwright` job is run if the frontend codebase has
not changed, and it simply passes the checks by having the same job names.

## Documentation jobs

### `emit-docs`

Builds the documentation and publishes it to an appropriate target. For PRs, the

> target is a subdirectory under `_preview/` of the docs site, so the docs for PR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
target is a subdirectory under `_preview/` of the docs site, e.g. the docs for PR
```

Author: Updated in 6ae49fe.

    - the author of the PR is not Dependabot
- either the documentation or the frontend has changed (for the Storybook and
  Tailwind Config Viewer)
- all the primary tests ([`test-cat`](#test-cat), [`test-ing`](#test-ing),
  [`test-api`](#test-api), [`nuxt-build`](#nuxt-build)) succeeded, implying that
  their changes are valid, or were skipped, implying that they have no changes.

## Docker images jobs

### `publish-images`

Publishes images to GHCR as dictated by the
[`determine-images`](#determine-images) job. In a matrix, this job downloads the
images to be published from their `.tar` files using the [`load-img`](#load-img)
job and then tags and pushes them to GHCR.

Images are only published if all the following conditions are met.

- the event is a push to `main`
- the repo is `WordPress/openverse` and not a fork
- there is at least one image to publish as per the `do_publish` output of the
  [`determine-images`](#determine-images) job
- all the primary tests ([`test-cat`](#test-cat), [`test-ing`](#test-ing),
  [`test-api`](#test-api), [`nuxt-build`](#nuxt-build)) succeeded, implying that
  their changes are valid, or were skipped, implying that they have no changes.

> ## Deployment jobs

Reviewer: Do we want to mention in both of these sections that we're deploying only the staging versions of each service, not production? I know that's mentioned at the top but it might be good to have here too.

Author: Updated in 6ae49fe.

  and deployed to the [root of the docs site](https://docs.openverse.org).

  See job [`emit-docs`](#emit-docs) for details.

- **Docker images:** When a new commit is pushed to `main`, the Docker images
  for each of the affected services is pushed to
  [GHCR](https://github.com/orgs/WordPress/packages?repo_name=openverse). These
  images are tagged with the SHA of the commit.

  See job [`publish-images`](#publish-images).

- **Frontend staging:** When a new commit is pushed to `main` which affects the
  frontend service and the tests for the frontend pass, a new
  [staging deployment of the frontend](https://staging.openverse.org/) is
  triggered. The deployment uses the image published above.

  See job [`deploy-frontend`](#deploy-frontend).

- **API staging:** When a new commit is pushed to `main` which affects the API
  service and the tests for the API pass, a new
  [staging deployment of the API](https://api-staging.openverse.engineering/) is
  triggered. The deployment uses the image published above.

  See job [`deploy-api`](#deploy-api).

## Actions

The workflow depends on four actions that have been taken out of the workflow
for reuse and readability.

> ### `get-changes`

Author: They're all under a H2 of "Actions".

> ### `get-changes`

Author: The sidebar also shows the hierarchy pretty clearly imo.

<img width="177" alt="Screenshot 2023-04-18 at 6 03 23 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16580576/232802020-7defab49-ad1a-4390-9ff7-9a61c6aa499d.png">

> ### `get-changes`

Reviewer 2: Sure, but unfortunately you could get linked to `get-changes` and easily confuse it if you didn't check the sidebar. I often view the documentation in a half-screen window which hides the sidebar as well. I don't think relying on ambient context to disambiguate two things named exactly the same thing is reliable.

Additionally, because they share the same header name, the generated anchor for the second is meaningless: https://docs.openverse.org/_preview/1001/reference/ci_cd.html#id1

> ### `get-changes`

Reviewer 2: Disregard my previous comment, the changes in the latest commit fix the issue :+1:

## Universal jobs

### `build-images`

Builds images as dictated by the [`determine-images`](#determine-images) job.
Since the images are built in a matrix, some image-specific steps are
conditionally run using an `if` expression. Since any unused Docker build
arguments have no effect, the job simply populates all build arguments needed by
all images.

Images built by this job are published as `.tar` artifacts and can be loaded
into other jobs that need them using the [`load-img`](#load-img) action.

This job is only run if there is at least one image needed to build, based on
the `do_build` output of the [`determine-images`](#determine-images) job.

## Catalog jobs

### `test-cat`

Runs tests for the catalog using the `catalog/test` recipe. Tests are run inside
a Docker container so neither Python nor Node.js needs to be installed.

This job is skipped if the catalog codebase has not changed. Its counterparts
are [`test-ing`](#test-ing) for the ingestion server, [`test-api`](#test-api)
for the API and [`nuxt-build`](#nuxt-build) for the frontend.

```{note}
This job is treated as the proof of functionality for publishing Docker images
for the catalog.
```

### `catalog-checks`

> Runs tests for the catalog using the `catalog/generate-dag-docs` recipe. The job
> generates a new file from a Docker container so Python does not need to be
> installed. However, the job runs linting on the new file, so Node.js needs to be
> set up.

Reviewer 2: The middle sentence is a little unclear unless you already know what this job does. I had to re-read it a few times to realise what was being conveyed by it. Suggested edit for clarity:

```suggestion
Runs tests for the catalog using the `catalog/generate-dag-docs` recipe. The job runs inside a Docker container so does not require python to be installed. However, the job generates a new documentation page that must be linted, so `setup-env` is required to install linting dependencies.
```

Hopefully that is a correct understanding of this. If not, it still needs further clarification :sweat_smile:

Author: Updated in a87e889.

This job is skipped if the catalog codebase has not changed.

## Ingestion server jobs

### `test-ing`

Runs tests for the ingestion server using the `ingestion_server/test-local`
recipe. Tests are run on the host so Python needs to be installed and set up.

This job is skipped if the ingestion server codebase has not changed. Its
counterparts are [`test-cat`](#test-cat) for the catalog,
[`test-api`](#test-api) for the API and [`nuxt-build`](#nuxt-build) for the
frontend.

```{note}
This job is treated as the proof of functionality for publishing Docker images
for the ingestion server.
```

## API jobs

### `test-api`

Initialises the API using the `api/init` recipe and runs tests for the API using
the `api/test` recipe. Tests are run inside a Docker container so neither Python
nor Node.js needs to be installed.

This job is skipped if the API codebase has not changed. Its counterparts are
[`test-cat`](#test-cat) for the catalog, [`test-ing`](#test-ing) for the
ingestion server and [`nuxt-build`](#nuxt-build) for the frontend.

```{note}

> This job is treated as the proof of functionality for publishing Docker images

Reviewer 2: After reading this note several times, I've realised that it implies that we publish Docker images that could have other problems not covered by unit tests. For example, we could publish an API docker image that is missing migrations. Is that intentional? Is it safe? What use are those docker images? Is the main reason for this to simplify the checks on the publish images job or is there a philosophical or practical reason why we should publish these images?

> for the API. Since it also initialises the API, it also largely proves that the
> ingestion server is working.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for the API. Since API tests depend on the initialisation of sample data handled by the ingestion server, this job also provides a basic verification of core ingestion server functionality.
```

I'd shy away from saying that running the init script "largely" proves the ingestion server is working. The init script does not (intentionally or explicitly) exercise every aspect of even the common route of the ingestion server like cleanup.

Author: Updated in a87e889.

proof of functionality for deploying frontend to staging.
```

### `nuxt-checks`

Runs a matrix for various Nuxt checks for the frontend using the following
Node.js scripts.

- `test:unit`
- `storybook:smoke`

This job is skipped if the frontend codebase has not changed. Its counterpart is
[`django-checks`](#django-checks) for the API.

#### `bypass-nuxt-checks`

The `nuxt-checks` job is marked as required check in GitHub. If the job is
skipped, the matrix will not be expanded into individual jobs and all required
checks will appear as pending, thus blocking PRs from being merged.

To counter this, the `bypass-nuxt-checks` job is run if the frontend codebase
has not changed, and it simply passes the checks by having the same job names.

### `playwright`

Runs a matrix of various Playwright tests for the frontend using the following
Node.js scripts.

- `test:playwright visual-regression`
- `test:playwright e2e`
- `test:storybook`

This job is skipped if the frontend codebase has not changed.

```{note}
This job, combined with the [`nuxt-build` job](#nuxt-build), is treated as the
proof of functionality for deploying frontend to staging.

> ```

Reviewer 2: Why are the `nuxt-checks` not required for deployment?

Author: Unit tests were deemed not that essential for deployment because
- the `lint` job (which is required for basically everything) includes type checking with `vue-tsc`
- the `nuxt-build` job (which is required for deploy) proves that Nuxt doesn't have any major issues to build and run
- the `playwright` job (which is required for deploy) includes the e2e tests

Reviewer 2: Gotcha! That is definitely worth documenting in this document.

I am sceptical that it is the right choice though, but that's a different issue altogether.

#### `bypass-playwright`

The `playwright` job is marked as required check in GitHub. If the job is
skipped, the matrix will not be expanded into individual jobs and all required
checks will appear as pending, thus blocking PRs from being merged.

To counter this, the `bypass-playwright` job is run if the frontend codebase has
not changed, and it simply passes the checks by having the same job names.

## Documentation jobs

### `emit-docs`

> Builds the documentation and publishes it to an appropriate target. For PRs, the

Reviewer 2: Should this clarify that it does not publish that API consumer docs? cf #1240
